Maize Production
for Food, Feed and Fodder
S.D. Bamboriya
Mukesh Choudhary
Alla Singh
S.L. Jat
Sujay Rakshit
ICAR-Indian Institute of Maize Research, PAU Campus
Ludhiana, Punjab-141 004 ((India)
Website: https://iimr.icar.gov.in
Email: director.maize@icar.gov.in,pdmaize@gmail.com
Phone: +91-161-2440047-48, Fax: +91 161 2430038
Citation: S.D. Bamboriya, Mukesh Choudhary, Alla Singh, S.L. Jat and Sujay Rakshit.
Maize production for food, feed and fodder. IIMR Technical Bulletin
2020/2.Indian Institute of Maize Research, PAU Campus, Ludhiana-
141004.
Published in 2020
Published by:
ICAR-Indian Institute of Maize Research
PAU Campus, Ludhiana, Punjab- 141 004 (India)
Website: https://iimr.icar.gov.in
Email: director.maize@icar.gov.in,pdmaize@gmail.com
Phone: +91-161-2440047-48, Fax: +91 161 2430038
Printed by:
Azad Offset Printers : # 144, Press Site, Indl. Area-1, Chandigarh
Tel. : 0172-4611489, 2656144, 2657144
Email: aop144@gmail.com
FOREWARD
Maize (Zea mays L.), the queen of cereals, surpasses all other food crops in its ability to
adapt to the diverse agro-ecological niches and being cultivated from 58oN to 55oS
latitude. It is the leading cereal crop in the world with more than one billion tonne
production. In India, it holds third rank among the cereals, after rice and wheat in terms
of area and production. Traditionally, maize is grown as a kharif crop in India, but from
1970s its expansion started in rabi season and later on in the spring season too. Now,
the crop is grown round the year and in all agro-ecologies throughout India, not only for
grain but also for specialized purposes like sweet corn, baby corn and for silage
making.
Maize is widely used as food, feed, fodder, industrial raw material and in recent past for
bio-fuel production. It is a key crop in doubling farmers' income as maize can be
integrated effectively with dairy, poultry, fisheries and piggery. Speciality corns has a
special role in value chain development. Considering the changing food habits in India,
the demand of maize is supposed to increase in the near future. To meet the growing
demand, there is a need to enhance maize productivity through adoption of the best
production practices by the maize farmers.
I am happy to know that ICAR-Indian Institute of Maize Research, Ludhiana is
bringing out a publication on ''Maize production for food, feed and fodder'' which have
complete cultivation information for normal and specialty maize right from the sowing
to harvesting. I congratulate the authors for their contributions in bringing out this
comprehensive and important publication. I am sure that this publication will be useful
for researcher, farmers and other stakeholders for enhancing the maize production and
productivity in the country.
(T R Sharma)
E-mail:ddgcs.icar@nic.in Phone:91-11-23382545 Fax:91-11-23097003
PREFACE
Declining water resources, degrading soil health, higher production cost, lesser
profitability and climate change are the major challenge before Indian agriculture.
Resource use smart crops which can give more profit from lesser resources are need of
the hour. Maize is one such crop with highest production potential and comparatively
lesser water foot-prints. It is a multi-purpose crop being used as food, feed, fodder, and
raw material for various industrial products including bio-fuels.
Maize is the leading cereal crop in the world with more than one billion tonne
production and in India it holds third rank after rice and wheat in terms of area and
production. Traditionally maize in India used to be consumed as food crop. However,
over time maize has become rather an industrial crop than food crop as over 75% of the
maize produced in India is used for industrial purchases, mostly as feed and source of
starches. Being industrial in nature maize can ensure higher remuneration. Further,
specialty corns, baby corn and sweet corn with short to medium duration cropping
period can play important role in diversification in peri-urban agricultural systems and
nutritional garden. They fit well in integrated farming system, where the byproduct of
specialty corn, i.e. green fodder can support livestock very well. During last 50 years,
maize productivity has increased from around 0.99 t/ha to 3.1 t/ha but still we are far
behind leading maize producing nations. Lesser adoption of improved production
practices is one among the key factors contributing low productivity of Indian maize,
besides prevalence of rainfed growing condition, limiting effects of various biotic and
abiotic stresses among others. Improved high yielding cultivars coupled with better
crop management is bound to increase productivity of maize in India.
The compiled production practices of various types of maize is expected help to
researcher, extension workers and farmers in enhancing maize production and
productivity in the country.
Authors
April 2020
Ludhiana (Punjab)
Table of Content
Parts Description Page No.
Part I Introduction
Part II Maize for grain purpose
Irrigated kharif maize
Rainfed kharif maize
Irrigated rabi maize
Irrigated spring maize
Part III Specialty maize
Pop corn
Baby corn
Sweet corn
Maize for green cob
Part IV Maize as fodder
Green fodder maize
Silage maize
Part V Zero till and conservation agriculture based maize
Part VI Recommended public sector maize varieties
Maize Production for Food, Feed and Fodder
Introduction
Climate change has far serious implications concerning the food and nutritional security of nations
like India where agriculture is the backbone of nation's economy and growing population is the
biggest reason to worry. Rural India largely depends on its natural resources and farming for
earning its livelihood and food security and climate change affects the natural ecosystem
progressively. In future, it will be even more difficult to predict occurrences of phenomena such as
droughts, floods, cloud bursts, etc. due to climate change. Consequently, farmers must adapt to the
changing climate to ensure optimum crop yields and farm income. Farmers in general and small and
marginal farmers in particular must enhance the resilience of agriculture to face the upcoming
challenges. Transforming agriculture through adoption of climate resilient practices and
technologies would be inevitable to stabilize agricultural production and enhance farmer's income.
Participatory demonstration of location specific and climate smart technologies is
necessary for enabling farmers to cope climatic variability and extreme weather phenomenon.
Adoption and spread of these climate resilient technologies would help farmers fetch adaption
gains and reduce the Green House Gas (GHG) emissions alongside. Considering the urgent need to
address the issue of climate change at the farm level, Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(ICAR) launched National Initiatives in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) in February, 2011,
which was renamed as National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) to
emphasize the role of evolving innovations. Resilience is the capability of the production system to
resist negative impacts of climate change and also the capacity to recover quickly after the damage.
Therefore, National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) was formulated to
develop and demonstrate region specific improved technologies that would enhance the resilience
of Indian agriculture to climate change thereby addressing climate vulnerability and its negative
impacts. The emphasis on adaptation to climate variability necessitates appropriate responses to
contingency situations. Considering the need to enhance the resilience of Indian agriculture
production system to climate variability and climate change, the center theme should be the
Sustainability of the production systems facing natural resource degradation. Thus, the centre of
attraction in NICRA is not the enhancement of productivity but the ability of the existing system to
cope with the vulnerability and to improve the natural resource use efficiency for sustaining the
productivity gains that have been achieved already. The project aimed to enhance resilience of
Indian agriculture to climate change and climate variability through its different components
namely Strategic Research, Technology Demonstration, Capacity Building and
Sponsored/Competitive Grants.
1
Uses of Maize
Feed
Approximately 60% of total maize production in India is used for preparation of concentrated feeds
for cattle, poultry and piggery as source of energy. Fishery feed also uses maize as an important
component. The yellow colour of maize is very useful in providing yellow colour to egg yolk and
yellow tinge to the milk.
Food
Grain maize, pop corn, baby corn, sweet corn and green maize cobs are widely used as human food.
Most commonly used forms are as Chapattis, porridges, corn flakes, boiled or roasted green ears,
pop corn, baby corn products like salad, vegetable, pickle, pakoda, kheer, laddu and halwa; sweet
corn products like soup, chat, corn cheese balls, masala corn and salad etc. Around 13% of total
maize grain production in India is used as food and 7% as processed food, however this does not
include use of specialty maize, particularly baby corn, sweet corn and green cobs.
Industrial uses
Maize acts as a raw material in the manufacture of starch, syrup, dextrose, oil, gelatine etc. Corn
flour is used as a thickening agent in the preparation of many edibles like soups, sauces and custard
powder. Corn syrup is used as sweetener in processed foods such as soft drinks and candies. Corn
sugar (dextrose) is used in pharmaceutical formulations. Maize oil is widely used as a cooking
medium and it has the quality of reducing cholesterol in the human blood. Maize oil has use in
cosmetics and pain industry as well. Corn gel because of its moisture retention character is used as a
bonding agent for ice-cream cones. Maize stalks are made into paper and wall board; husks are used
as filling material; cobs are used directly for fuel, to make furfurol, fermentable sugars, solvents,
liquid fuels, charcoal, pulp, paper and hard boards. Approximate 14% of total maize production in
India is utilised for industrial purposes.
Bio fuel and bioplastic
Maize is also used for liquid bio-fuel (ethanol) production in USA. The ethanol is used as
transportation fuel after blending with gasoline. India is also slowly opening up use of maize grain
for ethanol production. The maize starch is also used for making biodegradable plastic using poly
lactic acid (PLA) which will be very useful in the scenario of banning single use of plastic.
Forage and silage
Maize stalk is used to feed dairy animals in the form of green fodder, dry roughages andsilage.
Maize fodder has higher digestibility than any other non-leguminous forage crops and it does not
contain any toxic substances. Maize is also preferred for silage making over other fodders, as maize
plant is easy to chaff, requires less labour and its silage is soft.
2
Brief Cultivation Facts
A. Maize for grain
A.1. Irrigated kharif maize
Sowing time: Generally, the ideal sowing time is June 20 to end of July. However, in fields where
water stagnation may occur, early sowing is desirable so that plant reaches a firm stand to avoid
lodging associated with water logging.
Soil: Maize is very sensitive to water-logging and considerable yield losses occur if, the crop faces
water-stagnation for more than two days. Hence, it is better to plant the crop on well-drained sandy-
loam to silty-loam soils.
Land preparation: Maize needs well pulverized and smooth field for quick seed emergence and
root growth. Hence, two harrowing followed by one planking is needed for field preparation and
early season weed management. Maize can also be successfully produced under zero-till conditions
using happy seeder or zero till multi-crop planter.
a b
Fig: Land preparation (a) harrowing; (b) land leveling
Farm-equipments: Mould board plough (MB plough), disc or tine harrow, land-leveler, maize
planter, narrow bed planter, pneumatic planter, wide bed planter etc.
3
a b
c d
Fig: Maize planting equipment (a) Ridge planter; (b) Maize planter;
(c) Pneumatic planter; (d) Wide bed planter
Seed rate and seed treatment: Eight kg seed of field corn is needed for seeding in one acre area.
Seeds should be treated with any of the following fungicides and insecticides before sowing to
protect the crop from most prevalent (seed and soil borne) diseases and insect-pests.
1) Bavistin + Captan in 1:1 ratio@2g/kg seed for Turcicum leaf blight, Banded leaf and sheath
blight, Maydis leaf blight etc.
2) Apran 35 SD@4g/kg seed for Brown stripe downy mildew
3) Captan 2.5g/kg for Pythium Stalk Rot
4) Imidachlorpid (Gaucho) @ 6 ml/kg or Fipronil @4ml/Kg seed for termite and shoot fly.
5) Thiamethoxam + Cyantraniliprole @ 4 ml/kg seed for fall armyworm.
Any of the above seed treatment may be selected depending upon predominant biotic stresses.
Sowing method: In kharif sown maize, raised bed planting is recommended to protect the crop
from water logging. In raised bed planting, 70 cm wide ridges (40 cm ridge and 30 cm furrow) are
prepared with the help of bed planter. Bed planter with incline plate seed metering system can
precisely place the maize seed at required depth and does simultaneous operation of raised beds
making and planting. One line of maize on each raised bed is desirable when sole crop of maize is
planted keeping seed to seed spacing at 20 cm. Optimum plant density (30,000/acre) should be
maintained to tap full potentials of hybrids. Southern side planting is advised on East-West oriented
4
ridges. Happy seeder or zero-till bed planters with inclined plate to be used for crop establishment
under zero tillage or for sowing under crop residue.
Sowing depth: For proper germination and early vigor, seed should be sown at 3.5-5.0 cm depth.
Inter cropping: One row of either (a) Cowpea for fodder; (b) Soybean/urdbean/mungbean for
grain; (c) Groundnut for pods, in between two consecutive rows of maize is desirable for inter-
cropping with maize. The shade loving crops like turmeric and ginger can also be successfully
cultivated as intercrop with maize. Herbicides should not be used for weed control in inter-cropping
system. In case of intercropped maize slightly higher doses of fertilizers should be applied than
sole crop.
Irrigation management: Water requirement of maize is 500–800 mm per growing season. During
kharif season, partially water requirement is met by rainfall. Hence, 1-4 irrigations are required,
which may vary depending on frequency of rainfall. Adequate moisture at germination, pre-
tasseling, silking and grain-filling stages should be ensured through irrigation, if rainfall is not
there. If available, the sprinkler irrigation up to knee length stage is very good for maize crop. In
ridge-sown crop, irrigation should be given in furrow up to 2/3 of height of the ridge.
Nutrient management: Hybrid maize is very responsive to nutrient application and has slightly
high nutrient requirement as compare to other cereals due to high yield potential. It can be grown
both organically or by integrated nutrient management involving organic and inorganic nutrient
supplementation.
Organic nutrient management: Following options for nutrient management in organic maize
production to be used based on availability in suitable combination
l Green manuring: Green manuring crops like dhaincha/sunhemp/cowpea at 12/20/20 kg
seed rate/acre, respectively are very useful. Fifty days old crop is to be ploughed down
and reserve the field for 10 days for decomposition before sowing of maize.
l Straw of summer mungbean/cowpea may be buried before sowing of maize
l Farm yard manure/Compost @ 6 tonnes/acre or vermicompost @ 3 tonnes/acre
l Application of Azatobacter/Azospirillum with PSB and NPK consortia for seed
treatment @ 200 g/acre or liquid formulation @ 100 ml/acre.
Integrated nutrient management: Application of 6 tonnes/acre well decomposed farm yard
manure/compost mixed with Azatobacter/Azospirillum with PSB, VAM and NPK consortia @ 5-6
kg/acre or seed treatment with Azatobacter/Azospirillum with PSB and NPK consortia @ 200 g
each/acre or liquid formulation @ 100 ml/acre needed for better moisture retention and initial boost
of the crop. Macro- and micro-nutrient requirements of the crop need to be accomplished through
use of suitable fertilizers. The following schedule of fertilizer may be used:
5
Crop Stage Fertilizers scheduling
Sowing (Basal) Drill full dose of P, K and 1/3 of N-fertilizer dose, micro-
nutrient application
Knee-high (Ist split) Top dress 1/3 N-fertilizer dose and micronutrient spray
Pre-tasseling (2nd split) Top dressing of remaining 1/3 N-fertilizer dose and micro-
nutrient spray
Rate of different fertilizers
Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Varieties Sehedule
Urea DAP MOP ZnSO .7H O
Long duration Basal 23 52 27 10
hybrid
Ist split 44 -- -- --
2nd split 44 -- -- --
Short duration Basal 14 35 20 10
hybrid, composite Ist split 26 -- -- --
2nd split 26 -- -- --
Maize is sensitive to Zinc deficiency. Zinc deficient crop shows stunted growth and develop short
inter-nodes. A white (or pale-yellowish) tissue with reddish veins appears on leaf blade. To mitigate
it 10 kg/acre ZnSO4.7H2O or 6.5 kg/acre ZnSO4.H2O should be applied at sowing. Apply 10-15
kg Sulphar and 0.5 kg Boron/acre in deficient soils.
Fig: Zinc deficiency symptoms in maize
6
Weed management: Weeds significantly affect maize production and the critical period for crop-
weed completion is 15-45 days after sowing.
Cultural control of weeds: a) Two manual hoeing at 15 and 30 DAS; b) Inter-cropping of one or two
rows of fodder cowpea in between maize rows reduces weed problem considerably; c) Always use
weed free seeds for sowing; d) Do not spread un-decomposed compost in field because it may
contain viable weed seeds; e) Do not allow the seed formation of weeds in fields.
Chemical control of weeds: Pre-emergence Atrazine application @ 400 g ai/acre followed by one
hand weeding at 35-40 days gives good weed control. Recommended dose of Atrazine at pre-
emergence followed by either of the post-emergence herbicide (mentioned below) for effective
weed control is also equally effective.
a b
Fig: (a) Maize field after weeding; (b) Maize field after Tembotrione spray
7
Selective herbicides for maize
Herbicide Formulations Dose Time of application (DAS)
(g a.i./acre)
Atrazine 50% WP 400 0-2 (pre-emergence)
Topramezone 33.6% SC 10 20-30 (Post emergence)
Tembotrione 34.4% SC 48 20-30 (Post emergence)
Precautions:
l Use flat fan nozzle for herbicide spray.
l Do not use under/over dose of herbicide.
l While spraying weedicide sprayed field should not be stepped on, i.e. the farmer should move
backward or sidewards.
Saving crop in case of excess water damage: If water logging occurs in the field and damage is
moderate, 6 kg/acre of urea in two sprays at weekly intervals may be applied. In case of moderate to
severe damage, 25-50 kg urea/acre after the water flooding is over may be broadcasted.
a b
Fig: (a) Water-logged maize field (b) Growth reduction due to water-logging
Plant Protection
Major diseases: Maydis Leaf Blight (MLB), Bacterial Leaf and Sheath Blight (BLSB), Charcoal
Rot (CR), Bacterial Stalk Rot (BSR), Rajasthan Downey Mildew (RDM), Curvularia Leaf Spot
(CLS), Post Flowering Stalk Rot (PFSR), Brown strip Downey Mildew (BSDM) and Common
Rust are major diseases of maize.
8
a b c
d e f
g h i
Fig: Maize diseases (a) Maydis leaf blight; (b) Charcoal Rot; (c ) Bacterial stalk rot; (d) Rajasthan
downey mildew; (e ) Curvularia leaf spot; (f) Bacterial leaf and sheath blight ; (g) Post flowering
stalk rot; (h) Brown strip downey mildew; (i) Common rust
9
Disease management in maize
Disease Cultural control Chemical control
Maydis Deep ploughing of previous A) Seed treatment with Bavistin + Captan
leaf blight crop residue through in 1:1 ratio @ 2.0 g/kg seed
B) Spray Dithan Z-78 or Zineb @ 2.4-4
g/litre water and repeat the spray at 8-
10 days interval
C) Grow MLB resistance varieties, if the
disease incidence is regular
Bacterial Stripping of two lower leaves A) Seed treatment with Bavistin + Captan
leaf and along with leaf sheath in 1:1 ratio @ 2.0 g/kg seed
sheath B) Spray of Sheethmar (Validamycin) @
blight A). Deep ploughing, 2.7 ml/litre water
Charcoal
B). Crop rotation
rot
C). Maintain proper moisture
during flowering
Bacterial Stripping of two lower leaves A) Seed treatment with metalaxyl
stalk rot along with leaf sheath (Ridomil 25 WP, Apron 35 SD) @ 2.5
Rajasthan g/kg
A). Field sanitation
downey B) Foliar spray of metalaxyly (Apron 35
mildew B). Destroy infected plant FN) @ 2-2.5 g/liter of water at very first
appearance of disease
Curvularia A) Spray (Carbendazim 12% + mecozeb
leaf spot 62.7%) @ 2 g/liter water 35 and 55
DAS
B) If zineb is available, then spray Zineb
75% @ 2 g/liter at 35 and 55 DAS
10
Disease Cultural control Chemical control
Post A) Maintain optimum plant - - -
flowering population
stalk rot B) Avoid excess N
C) Follow crop rotation with
non-host crop like soybean
D) Manage attack of stem borer
as their injury predisposes
to stalk rot
Brown A) Field sanitation A) Seed treatment with metalaxyl
strip B) Destroy infected plants (Ridomil 25 WP, Apron 35 SD) @ 2.5
downey g/kg
C) Weed control
mildew B) Foliar spray of metalaxyly (Apron 35
D) Maintain optimum plant
FN) @ 2-2.5 g/litre of water at very
stand
first appearance of disease
E) Planting before rainy
season
F) Maintain low seed moisture
(9%) at planting
Common A) Field sanitation Spray Diathane M-45 @ 2.4-4 g/litre
rust B) Destroy infected plants water and repeat the spray at 8-10 days
interval
C) Weed control
D) Maintain optimum plant
stand
E) Planting before rainy
season
F) Maintain low seed moisture
(9%) at planting
Major Insect Pests: Maize stem borer, Pink stem borer, Shoot fly and Fall army worm are major
pest of maize Among these pests, Maize stem borer occurs in kharif, Pink stem borer in rabi and
Shoot fly in spring season.
11
a b
c d
e f
12
a b
Fig: Mazie pests (a) Maize stem bore; (b) Damage symptoms Maize stem borer; (c ) Fall armyworm
larvae; (d) Damage symptoms of FAW; (e ) Pink stem borer; (f) Damage symptoms of Pink stem
bore; (g )Shoot fly; (h) Damage symptoms of Shoot fly
Management of maize pests
Pest Cultural control Chemical control Biological control
Maize Stem Grow cowpea in Spray the crop with Use Trichocards
Borer (Kharif between maize rows chemicals like (Trichogrammachilonis)
season pest) and as intercrop against Chlorantraniliprole on 15 days old crop @ 3
Pink stem borer Maize stem borer. 18.5% SC @ 60 ml cards per acre
(rabi season pest) per acre at 15-18 DAS
Border planting of Place a pinch of
sorghum (3-4 rows) Carbofuran 3% G in
around maize crop whorl of infested
against Maize stem maize plant at initial
borer. stage of infestation
13
Pest Cultural control Chemical control Biological control
Fall Army Worm Choose cultivars Whorl application of Whorl application of
with tough husk either of pesticide either of biological
cover formulations at 15-25
days after sowing
Border planting of A) Spinetoram11.7% A) 5% NSKE or
sorghum (3-4 rows) SC @ 0.5ml/l azadirachtin 1500
around maize crop ppm @ 5 ml/litre
against Maize stem B) Thiamethoxam B) Metarhizium
borer. 12.5% + Lambda anisopliae talc
Cyhalothrin 9.5% formulation (1x108
ZC @ 0.25 ml/l cfu/g) @ 5g/litre
C ) C) Nomuraea rileyi rice
Chlorantraniliprol grain formulation
e 18.5% SC @ 0.4 (1x108 cfu/g) @
ml/l 3g/litre
D) Btk formulation @
D) E m a m e c t i n 2ml/l of water
benzoate 5 SG @
0.4 g/l
Intercropping with -- Release of Tricho-
pulses and other gramma pretiosum @
non-host crop 50000 Or Telenomus
remus @ 10,000 per
acre at weekly intervals
Shoot fly Early planting in A) Seed treatment --
(spring) first week of with Imidacloprid
February 600 FS (Gaucho)
@ 6 m l / k g o r
Thiomethoxam 30
FS @ 8ml/kg seed.
B) Soil application of
Furadan (Carbo-
furan3G) @ 8-10
kg per acre in the
furrow during
sowing is also
helpful agains
14
Application of nitrogen and irrigation after control measures helps in faster recovery from pest
damage.
Bird management: Nearly ten bird species feed and damage maize cobs. The yield loss due to bird
feeding is huge and ranges between 10 to 40% in the case of maize crop. To reduce the damage by
Parakeets and crows, cover maize cobs by wrapping adjacent green leaves around them on outer
four rows of the field. Acoustic devices also available in market which keep away depredatory birds
from fields by producing recorded sounds. These devices produce natural sound of bird predators
and alarm call of pest birds. Thus, the pest birds avoid the broadcast area. Beside this, reflective
ribbons also scare birds through reflection of sunlight and humming noise produced by the wind.
Harvesting and shelling: Maize can be harvested when the husk has dried and turned brown. Apart
from hand-picking, combined harvester may also be used for quick harvesting. After manual
harvesting, depending upon the cultivated area, manual shellers or maize dehusker-cum-sheller or
maize thresher may be used for separating grains from cobs.
Fig: Combine harvesting in maize
Grain drying: During harvesting of maize, grain moisture content is quite high (~30-35%). Due to
higher moisture content farmers cannot get good price of their produce. Beside this, storage at high
grain moisture creates problems of fungal infection and can cause heating and loss of germination.
Hence, after crop harvesting, produce drying is very much essential. Portable Maize Dryer can be
used for reducing the moisture content of the cobs. It is tractor or electricity driven, portable and
long lasting dryer. It can dry any type of grain and do not need pre-cleaning of grains. Its drying rate
ranges between 2-10 t/h depending on crop type, grain moisture content etc. The optimum moisture
in grain for long-term storage should be below 14%. Sun drying of the cobs and seeds is required in
absence of other drying options prior to marketing as moisture above optimum level reduces market
prices and increases chance of aflatoxin contamination.
15
Fig: Mobile batch dryer
Grain storage: Large scale kharif maize harvesting during October-November and rabi maize in
April-May months, result in price drop. Hence, to fetch better price, farmers generally store their
produce for higher profitability. But, the higher atmospheric humidity, cloudy weather and higher
grain moisture content leads to fungal infection and physical deterioration of maize grain. Hence,
proper drying followed by moisture proof storage are very much needed for long term storage of
maize grains. Pusa bin and metal bin are some cost-effective and moisture proof storage structures
which can be used by maize farmers. Pusa bin is modification of ordinary mud storage structure. It
is rectangular in shape and constructed of bricks and earth. To make it moisture proof, a plastic film
(700 gauge) is used all around ((inner side) of bin. It can store up to 3 tonnes of well dried grains for
longer period with minimum loss. Metal bin is moisture proof storage structure and made of steel or
aluminium. The bin is durable and also commercially available. Its storage capacity ranges from 1
to 10tonnes. Hermatic cocoons are another storage container having two plastic half-joined
together with a air tight zip. It is made up of thin and ultra low permeable plastic with 500 times
lesser permeability to oxygen than normal plastic. The air tight container prevent development of
storage pest as it block respiration of pest (due to low oxygen). It does not allow moisture
movement hence also prevent aflatoxin problem.
Store grain pest management: Rice weevil and Angoumois grain moth are major pest of maize
during storage. Following point should keep in mind during storage.
l The moisture content of grain should be less than 12%.
l Clean the storage bins before using them for storage.
l Newer grains should not be mixed with older ones.
l Staggered sun drying with short exposure to sun spread reduces insect infestation.
16
l Use of plant products such as Adathoda vasica, Azadirachta indica, Vitex negundo,
Catharanthus roseus @ 2% w/w (20g /kg seed) have been found to be effective against storage
pests.
A.2. Rainfed kharif maize
Sowing time: In rainfed regions sowing time is rain dependent and should be done just after
monsoon occurance in end of June to second fortnight of July.
Seed rate and spacing requirement in rainfed maize
Seed rate (kg/acre) Spacing (cm) Plant population (per acre)
7-8 70 x 20 -25 23,134 to 28,918
Fertilizer scheduling: Organic nutrient supplementation to be given and inorganic N fertilizers is
to be splitted into two doses, at basal and depending on moisture availability between knee high to
tasseling stage.
Rate of different fertilizers needed for rainfed maize crop
Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Soil Type Schedule
Urea DAP ZnSO4.7H2O
Sandy loam to clay loam Basal 46 35 10
soil with adequate 1st split
moisture stored 24 -- --
Loamy sand to sandy Basal
35 18 --
soils with low moisture
1st split
stored
-- -- --
Soil moisture conservation: For rainfed crops, soil moisture is the most limiting factor. Hence,
moisture conservation practices are required to be followed to attain maximum yield.
17
Soil moisture conservation practice.
l Plough the field against slope after pre-monsoon showers to enhance water
absorption/filtration
l Sowing and other operations should be carried out on contour/across the slope
l Spread locally available mulching material in the last week of August
l Application of the farm yard manure/compost @ 5-6 tonnes/acre
Rest agronomic practices are same as discussed earlier.
A.3. Rabi maize
Sowing time: 15th October to 15th November is the best time, however this may vary for region to
region.
Sowing method: Before sowing, seed should be soaked overnight in warm (45oC at the time of seed
soaking) water. This treatment helps in obtaining better plant stand and healthy crop. Sowing
should be done on the southern side of the east-west ridge so that the optimum amount of sunshine is
received and the seedbed remains warm.
Seed rate and spacing requirement in rabi maize
Seed rate (kg/acre) Spacing (cm) Plant population (per acre)
20-22 60 x 20 33,333
Intercropping: During the rabi season potato, table pea, onion, garlic, coriander, spinach,
coriander, beetroot, cabbage etc. can be grown in between maize rows to ensure higher income of
growers without harming the yield of winter maize.
Fertilizer scheduling: The following fertilizer schedule should be used to get higher yield.
Crop stage Schedule Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Urea DAP MOP ZnSO.7HO
4 2
Before at sowing Basal
26 70 40 10
4 leaf stage 1st split 26 - - -
8 leaf stage 2nd split 40 - - -
Tasseling stage 3rd split 26 - - -
Grain filling stage 4th split 6 - - -
18
Irrigation management: Four to six irrigations are needed for rabi season crop. If six irrigations
are given, they should be applied as two before flowering, one at the time of flowering, two after
flowering and one at the early grain-filling stage. If only five irrigations are given, one irrigation at
the vegetative stage may be avoided; and if only four irrigations are given, irrigation after the dough
stage may be avoided. The irrigation should, however be changed suitably if adequate rains are
received. Rest management practices are similar to irrigated maize.
A.4. Spring maize
Sowing time: January 20 – February 20 is ideal sowing time for spring maize planting.
Sowing method: Evaporative losses of water during spring season from the soil under flat as well
as raised bed planting is higher and hence crop suffers from moisture stress. Under such conditions,
it is always advisable to grow maize in furrows for proper growth, seed setting and higher
productivity. Zero-till planning is beneficial in spring maize after harvesting of potato, mustard etc.
Irrigation: Spring maize needs nearly 10-15 irrigations sometimes even higher as the evapo-
transpiration demand is quite higher in summer season. Hence, a water use-efficient irrigation
system i.e. drip method is desirable under spring sown maize. Apply first irrigation at 25-30 DAS.
Under non-drip irrigation, apply irrigation at 2 weeks interval upto10th April and on per week basis
after this, up to maturity. From water conservation point of view spring maize without drip
irrigation is not recommended.
Fertilizer scheduling: For higher yield, integrated nutrient management found beneficial for
spring maize and organic sources option mentioned in kharif maize to be used along with chemical
fertilizer mentioned as below:
Rate of different fertilizers needed
Varieties Schedule Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Urea DAP MOP ZnSO.7HO
4 2
Medium duration Basal 33 55 27 10
hybrid 1st split 33 -- --
2nd split 33 -- --
Medium duration Basal 25 27 27
hybrid 1st split 25 -- --
2nd split 25 -- --
Rest management practices are similar to irrigated kharif maize for grain purpose.
19
B. Specialty corn/special purpose maize
B.1. Pop corn
Pop corn cultivation practices are similar to grain purpose as discussed earlier except the pop corn
cultivars are shorter of duration (80-90 days). However, as a premier crop preferably to be grown
under irrigated conditions. This crop needs isolation of at least 400 m from normal maize as
pollination with normal maize deteriorates its popping quality. Generally, 10-15 days isolation in
sowing time also ensures quality pop corn. As the plant type of the pop corn is weak and affected
more by diseases and pest and thus should be preferably to be grown in mild climate i.e. winter
season/hilly areas for better yield and quality.
Seed and spacing requirement Seed and spacing requirement
Seed rate (kg/acre) Spacing (cm) Plant population (per acre) Seed rate (kg/acre) Spacing (cm) Plant population (per acre)
4 - 5 60 x 20 33,724 4 - 5 60 x 20 33,724
Rest management practices are similar to irrigated maize for grain purpose.
B.2. Baby corn
It is shortest duration maize crop and gets ready for harvesting within two months of planting and
harvested in 60-70 days during kharif and 80-100 days in rabi season. This crop needs isolation of at
least 400 m from normal maize as pollination deteriorates its quality. Generally, 10-15 days
isolation in sowing time also ensures quality baby corn. Detasseling is needed in baby corn for
quality assurance. It is done by removing the tassel of the plant as soon as it emerges from the flag
leaf. It should be practiced row-wise. While detasseling, leaf should not be removed which will
otherwise affect net photosynthesis and ultimately reduce average baby corn yield. However, this is
not needed when male sterile baby corn cultivars are chosen for cultivation. Harvesting should be
done in morning or evening and stored under cool conditions in shed. After dehusking cobs should
preferably kept under wrap and refrigerated. The crop should be harvested after 1-3 days of silk
emergence. The remaining plant portion (tassels, main stem, husks) serves as nutritious green
fodder for livestock.
Sowing time: The sowing to be avoided in areas receiving temperature of less than 10C at any of the
crop growth stages for higher yield of baby corn. It can be sown round the year in India expect
second fortnight of December to end of January in Northern India.
Seed and spacing requirement
Seed rate (kg/acre) Spacing (cm) Plant population (per acre)
10 - 12 60*15-20 33,724 to 44,966
20
Intercropping: In general, short duration varieties of intercrops to be preferred for
intercropping with baby corn. In kharif season, cowpea for green pods and fodder purposes
and coriander for green leaves can be intercropped with baby corn. Baby corn can be
intercropped with vegetable crops, viz., spinach, cabbage, cauliflower, coriander, sugar
beet, radish etc which is particularly suitable in rabi season baby corn. Recommended dose
of fertilizers of intercrops should be applied in addition to the recommended dose of
fertilizers of baby corn.
Fig: Maize based intercropping
21
Fertilizer scheduling: Since baby corn is consumed as vegetable organically grown baby corn has
market demand both at local and international level. The organic input mentioned for the normal
kharif maize to be used for organic baby corn production. For higher yield integrated nutrient
management found beneficial for baby corn and organic sources option mentioned in kharif maize
to be used along with chemical fertilizer mentioned as below:
Crop stage Schedule Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Urea DAP MOP ZnSO.7HO
4 2
Before/at sowing Basal 10 50 40 10
4 leaf stage 1st split 26 -- -- --
8 leaf stage
2nd split 40 -- -- --
Before detasseling
After detasseling/ 3rd split 32 -- -- --
one picking 4th split 20 -- -- --
Irrigation management: Young seedlings, knee high stage, silking and picking are the most
sensitive stages for water stress for baby corn and irrigation should be ensured at these stages. Light
and frequent irrigations are desirable for baby corn.
Pest Management: As duration of baby corn is short, it experiences lesser extent of pest damage.
However, as it is consumed fresh pesticides should be applied judiciously, if required.
Rest management practices for baby corn are similar to normal irrigated maize.
B.3. Sweet corn
This crop gets ready for harvesting just 20 days after pollination i.e. within 65-75 days in kharif and
80-100 days in rabi season. At high temperature due to conversion of fructose into polysaccharides
it losses flavor. Due to this reason, sweet corn cultivation should be avoided in spring season. This
crop needs isolation of at least 400 m from normal maize as pollination deteriorates its quality.
Generally, 10-15 days isolation in sowing time also ensures quality sweet corn. The cobs should be
plucked during morning or evening time. Harvested green cobs should be immediately transported
to the cold storage in refrigerated trucks. The maize plant parts after harvesting of cobs can be
utilized as excellent green fodder. Intercrops as discussed in baby corn can also be grown with
sweet corn successfully for higher profitability.
Sowing time: The sowing to be avoided in areas receiving temperature of less than 10C at any of the
crop growth stage. At sowing, temperature below 15C may lead to rotten seed. The increase in
temperature to more than 35C at tasseling i.e. 45-55 days after sowing leads to tassel blast and lesser
grain setting. Therefore, sweet corn can be sown from June to October and in February in Northern
India and throughout the year in southern India.
22
Seed and spacing requirement
Seed rate (kg/acre) Spacing (cm) Plant population (per acre)
2.5-3 75x25-30 17,986 to 21,583
Transplanting: Due to costlier seed and lesser plant population, seedling transplanting is
beneficial in sweet corn. The seedling should be transplanted when plants are 15-25 cm tall.
Transplanting is also beneficial for getting early sweet corn in market for fetching higher prices.
However, there should be adequate moisture at the time of transplanting. To avoid damage by ants
and other insects the nursery may be treated with furadon or similar granules.
a b
Fig: (a) Maize nursery (b) Transplanting of maize seedlings
Fertilizer scheduling: The organic input mentioned for the normal kharif maize can be used for
organic sweet corn production. For higher yield, integrated nutrient management found beneficial
and organic sources option mentioned in kharif maize to be used along with chemical fertilizer
mentioned as below:
Crop stage Schedule Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Urea DAP MOP ZnSO.7HO
4 2
Before/at sowing Basal 45 45 30 10
25 DAS 1st split 35 -- -- --
At flowering 2nd split 20 -- -- --
23
Irrigation management: The most critical period to have adequate moisture is during tasseling
and silking. Growers should be prepared to irrigate at least 2.5-4.0 cm a week in order to produce
high quality sweet corn.
Pest Management: As duration of sweet corn is short and consumed, fresh pesticides should be
applied judiciously, if required.
Rest management practices for sweet corn are similar to normal irrigated maize.
B.4. Maize for green cob
The cultivation practices are very similar to sweet corn. The cob plucking should be done at 25-35
days after flowering, when cob colour is still green and kernel are at soft dough stage. The green
plants are excellent source of fodder. Remaining practices are same as of sweet corn.
24
C. Maize as fodder
C.1. Maize for green fodder
Tall, leafy, succulent, late maturing and stay-green type cultivars are desirable for fodder purpose.
Sowing should be done using normal seed drill. Weeding in generally not required as the high-
density planting leads to less penetration of sunlight resulting in poor growth of weeds.
Sowing time: The sowing to be avoided in areas receiving temperature of less than 10C at any of the
crop growth stages for higher yield of fodder maize. It can be sown round the year in India expect
second fortnight of December to end of January in Northern India. However, fodder maize is most
profitable in kharif season, which can be used for silage preparation.
Seed and spacing requirement
Seed rate (kg/acre) Spacing (cm) Plant population (per acre)
25 30*10 134,898
Fertilizer scheduling
Crop stage Schedule Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Urea DAP MOP ZnSO.7HO
4 2
Before/at sowing Basal 55 55 30 10
25-30 DAS 1st split 55 -- -- --
Harvesting should be done just after flowering (at 60-70 DAS) for better quality fodder. Rest
agronomic management practices are similar to kharif irrigated maize.
C.2. Maize for silage making
All the cultivation practices are similar to kharif/spring sown irrigated maize except harvesting,
which should be done 25-30 days after flowering (milky to dough stage of grain). Harvesting of
maize for silage purpose may be done using Fodder Auto-chopper Loader Machine. Silage can be
prepared easily by silo pack machine. This machine can cut and crash the green fodder, load it in the
50 kg air tight plastic bag and compress it. After this process, the bag can be sealed with thread and
can be stored in open place for ensiling (process of silage making). These 50 kg capacity bags are
easy to handle and transport.
25
D. Zero till and conservation agriculture based maize cultivation
Under zero till (ZT) cultivation, planting is to be done in stubble of previous crop without any soil
disturbance/tillage operation. This saves diesel, tractor's working time and labor and offer timely
sowing of succeeding crops. Seed and fertilizers should be placed in band using zero-till Seed-cum-
Fertilizer Planter with furrow opener or happy seeder. Weed management is entirely dependent on
chemicals as tillage and hand hoeing is prohibited in ZT maize. Destroy the weed before seeding by
pre-plant application (10-15 days prior to seeding) of non-selective herbicides, viz., paraquat @ 0.2
kg a.i. per acre in 600 litre water. Under heavy weed infestation, post-emergence application of
selective herbicides (mentioned earlier) should be done.
ZT along with surface residue application and diversified crop rotation is known as conservation
agriculture. Surface residue retention improves soil physical, chemical and biological activities,
reduces soil erosion & evaporation and also moderate soil temperature. Diversified crop rotation
break the disease cycle and also improve soil fertility. Zero till planter (under lesser residue load)
and happy seeder (under heavy residue load) can be used for planting in no-till field.
Difference in management practices under conventional and conservation agriculture
Practices Conventional agriculture Conservation agriculture
Tillage, sowing and Soil is manipulated 4-5 times Soil is disturb to a minimum
intercultural operation for tillage operation, seeding extent as tillage and inter-
and intercultural operations. cultural operations are
completely avoided and
sowing is done by opening
narrow furrow just to put seed.
Cropping system Mono-cropping/less efficient Diversified crop rotations
rotation
Residue management Remove/burn Keep on soil surface
Weed management Hand weeding and/or Herbicide application
herbicide application
26
Effect of conventional and conservation agriculture based practices
Particular Conventional agriculture Conservation agriculture
Fuel consumption More Lesser
Cost of land preparation More Lesser
Sowing of succeeding crop Delay Timely
Soil health Poor Good
Soil compaction More Lesser
Water logging More Lesser
Soil erosion More Less
a b
Fig: (a) Zero till planting of maize in mungbean residue; (b) Surface residue retention in maize
27
Recommended maize varieties(released in last 6 years)
Variety Zone Yield Maturity Season Year of
(t/ha) (days) release
Normal maize
DMRH 1305 NHZ 6.5 Early Kharif 2018
DMRH-1301 NEPZ, CWZ 9.9 94-96 Rabi 2018
GAWMH-2 Gujarat - Early Kharif 2018
DMRH-1308 CWZ 9.6 92-94 Rabi 2018
Karimnagar Makka PZ 7.9 90-95 Rainfed kharif 2017
Pant Shankar Makka-4 Uttarakhand 4.6 82-84 Kharif 2017
Central Maize VL 55 NHZ, PZ 7.6 95-97 Kharif 2017
PMH-10 Punjab 11.7 175-180 Spring 2016
Hema Karnataka 5.6 120-125 Spring 2016
Pratap Makka-9 Rajasthan 4.8 81-87 Kharif, rabi 2016
Palam Shankar Makka-2 NHZ 9.8 Medium Kharif 2016
Pratap Hybrid CWZ 5.6 Early Kharif 2016
Kharif Maize-3
Karimnagar makka-1 Telangana 9.5 Medium Kharif ,rabi 2016
PMH-8 Punjab 8.3 112 Spring 2016
Palam shankar makka-1 CWZ 5.3 Late Kharif 2015
CoH(M) 10 PZ 7.2 Medium Kharif 2015
HM-13 NHZ 6.6 Early Kharif 2015
PMH-6 NEPZ 6.3 Medium Kharif 2015
CoH(M) 7 NEPZ, PZ 7.8 Late Kharif 2014
CoH(M) 8 NWPZ, NEPZ, PZ, CWZ 7.1 Medium Kharif 2014
CoH(M) 9 NEPZ, CWZ 6.4 Medium Kharif 2014
DHM-121 NEPZ, CWZ 5.4 Medium Kharif 2014
GH-0727 Karnataka 7.5 Late Kharif 2014
Vivek Maize Hybrid-47 NHZ 6.9 Early Kharif 2014
Vivek Maize Hybrid -53 NHZ 6.9 Extra-early Kharif 2014
Vivek Maize Hybrid -51 CWZ 5.1 Extra early Kharif 2014
28
Variety Zone Yield Maturity Season Year of
(t/ha) (days) release
QPM/EDV
Pusa HM-8 Improved PZ 6.3 90-95 Kharif 2017
Pusa HM-9 Improved NEPZ 5.2 85-90 2017
Kharif
Pusa HM-4 Improved NWPZ, NEPZ 6.4 90-95 Kharif 2017
Pusa Vivek QPM-9 NHZ, CWZ 5.6 80-85 Kharif 2017
Improved
Shaktiman-5 NEPZ 5.5 Medium Kharif & 2018
& 8.0 Rabi
Shalimar QPMH-1 J & K 6 135 Kharif 2019
SWEET CORN
-
Shalimar Sweet Corn-1 J & K 90-95 Kharif 2019
-
VL Sweet Corn Hybrid-2 NHZ 90-95 Kharif 2019
10.8
Central Maize CL Sweet NHZ, NWPZ 90-95 Kharif 2016
Corn-1
BABY CORN
IMHB1539 NHZ 1.3 Short Kharif 2018
IMHB1532 NWPZ, CWZ 2.0 Short Kharif 2018
Vivek Hybrid 27 NHZ, CWZ 2.2 95-97 Kharif 2017
POPCORN
DMRHP-1402 NEPZ, CWZ 3.9 75-77 Kharif 2018
Shalimar Pop Corn-1 NHZ, NWPZ, NEPZ, PZ 3.9 95-100 Kharif 2017
BPCH-6 NHZ,CWZ, PZ, NEPZ, 3.2 Early Kharif 2015
NWPZ
29
Notes
30
